http://www.tandfonline.com/doi/full/10.1080/10481885.2015.1013826

Psychoanalytic Dialogues (2015)
Credo and Reflections 
George E. Atwood

STUDYING MADNESS

As a young man, having just discovered the world of psychoanalysis, it occurred to me that the study of very severe psychological disturbances might lead to an understanding of the foundational constituents of human nature. Nothing could be more interesting, I thought, than to search for a new and deeper knowledge of the human condition as a psychotherapist. I have had the good fortune to pursue this quest for half a century.
One may ask the question, What really is madness? Here is how I would sum it up. Madness is not an illness or disease, it is not a condition existing somehow inside a person, and it is not a thing of any kind having objective existence. Madness is an experience a person may have, one involving in its essential core a fall into nonbeing. Madness is the dissolution of all order and a descent into chaos. It is the greatest catastrophe of subjectivity that can happen to a person. The felt reality of the world disintegrates and the enduring solidity and integrity of one’s sense of selfhood—the ongoing experience of “I am”—becomes tenuous, unstable, and even vanishes. Madness is the abyss and there is nothing more frightening, not even death.
Our minds can generate meanings and images of our deaths: We can picture the world surviving us, and we can identify with those that come later or otherwise try to immortalize ourselves through our works. We can rage against the dying of the light, and we can look forward to reunions with lost loved ones in the afterworld. We can think about the meaninglessness of human existence and its finitude. We can be relieved that all our sorrows will soon be over. We can even admire ourselves for being the only creatures in existence, as far as we know, who perceive their own wretched destiny to be extinguished. The abyss of madness offers no such possibilities: It is the end of all possible responses and meanings, the erasure of a world in which there is anything coherent to respond to, the melting away of anyone to engage in a response. It is much more scary than death, and this is proven by the fact that people in annihilation fear—the terror of madness—so often commit suicide rather than allow themselves to be engulfed by it.
In working with madness as a psychotherapist, one draws close to a realm in which there are no orienting landmarks, no coherent purposes and desires that point to a meaningful future, no organized recollections establishing a continuous past. The ordering structures of existence itself collapse, all sense of personal identity becomes erased, and one may fear being pulled out of one’s sanity and into the nothingness. This is the terror of madness, and it affects all those who come into its vicinity.
How can we, as explorers of the human soul, enter this dark territory? I think we need a map of that chaos, a picture of the variations we will encounter, and some general guidelines as to how we might respond to the disastrous human situations that are encountered. Also needed are protections from how we are ourselves perceived. A terrible toll may be taken on the clinician who may be viewed as a persecutor, as a god, or even as a persecuting god. An even greater injury may be inflicted on the patient, someone already in terrible trouble who now faces being seen as insane.
Psychotherapy is a world within the world, one in which patient and therapist gaze into each other’s eyes and see themselves reflected in ways that may clash profoundly with what they feel is true or most deeply need. The mismatching of such images leads to all manner of difficulties for both parties, often spiraling into chronic impasses and the loss of the possibility of a healing connection.
How can we as therapists be shielded against the terror of being drawn into the madness and against the potential violence to ourselves of the interplay with those who are lost in chaos? What protections can there be that will not operate as well at the expense of the patient? The key lies in one thing only: the power of human understanding. We must understand annihilation states and all the signs and symptoms expressing a person’s struggle with such experiences. We must know the symbols typically used to represent these states of mind, images that are often concretized or reified, that is, treated as tangible, substantial realities. We must use our understanding then to discover responses to our patients’ crises that will help them refind a personal center and feel included again in the human community. This is the work of clinical psychotherapy research, a field now on the threshold of a new age as the older ideas about objectified “mental illnesses” recede and a new emphasis on phenomenology arises.
Let me offer a thought on systems of psychiatric diagnosis, which everyone who enters our field encounters. Sometimes these systems turn into dragons that consume the minds of those who use them. There is nothing wrong with careful studies of the symptoms and signs of psychological disturbances, and with efforts to classify the richly varied phenomena one sees in this realm of study. Ordering principles need to be applied so that we are not just left adrift in a sea of confusion. A problem arises, however, when the classifications we impose on the variations that are observed become reified and objectified, turned into mental diseases imagined as existing somehow inside the people we seek to understand. Our patients in extreme distress reify their fantasies, generally in order to substantiate personal realities that have come under assault and are threatened with dissolution. We in parallel often reify our diagnostic concepts, ascribing the chaotic manifestations confronting us to a disease process inside the patient. Such a locating of the problem in the internal, not grounded in any actual scientific knowledge, basically takes the clinician off the hook. He or she is not implicated in what is seen; instead the clinician sits high and dry, observing and classifying from a position of serene detachment, wrapped in a cordon sanitaire. This shields us from feeling responsible for how we are experienced and utterly neutralizes the power of the patient’s attributions to attack or displace our own ways of defining ourselves. The problem is that the clinician is implicated: What people show us depends in part on how we are responding to them. Human experience is always embedded in a relational context. If that response organizes itself around an objectifying psychiatric diagnosis, one can expect to see reactions to the distancing and invalidation that is involved. If those very reactions are then ascribed again to the supposed mental illness, the distancing is deepened and the disjunction rigidifies. It is important to learn about diagnostic systems, but we must not let them become our commanding, reifying viewpoints. One should be guided instead by attention to the patients’ experiences and by reflections on one’s own. We are still at the beginning of exploring this strange and complicated country.

SECRETS OF THE MIND

In my youthful enthusiasm long ago, I imagined that a careful analysis of the fragments into which psychiatric patients disintegrate might disclose the basic elements of human nature. Although I have tried to follow through on this quest, I cannot say that I have succeeded in any literal sense. There is, however, one central discovery that has occurred as a result of my journey: myself. Amidst the shattered hearts, the broken minds, the annihilations, it is as if the pattern of my own life was somehow inscribed. Exploring the souls of my patients therefore has led me again and again to the depths and origins of my own lifeworld. Could it be that the study of madness presents us all with opportunities to discover who we actually are? Could it also be that the effort to assist those who come to us presents us a chance to heal our own wounds as well?
I shall tell about one of my own early experiences in this connection. My first seriously challenging patient, a young woman I met decades ago, believed with all her heart that she was a part of the Holy Trinity and that she was one with God. Her story is given in the first chapter of my 2011 book, The Abyss of Madness. She and I, over the tumultuous course of our early relationship, came to an understanding of her situation as centrally relating to a catastrophe that had occurred in her childhood: the sudden suicide of her beloved father. I saw how the tragic loss had bisected her youth into before and after, into father and no father. As our shared journey continued and her healing began, I became witness to a gradual smoothing out of the traumatic bifurcation with the emergence of feelings of furious rage, of heartbreaking sorrow, of annihilating invalidation. At some point along the way—I cannot say precisely when—it dawned on me that in looking at her life I was also seeing an image of my own. You see, my childhood also was divided into a before and an after, the separation caused by the sudden death of my mother when I was a young boy. In coming to the tragedy that had disastrously affected my patient’s development, I had been returned to the tragedy of my own. In witnessing her slow healing and recovery, in turn, my own healing—continuing down to the present day—had a chance to begin. The great German philosopher-historian Wilhelm Dilthey (1926/1961) famously proclaimed that in the study of persons in the so-called human sciences, all understanding is a matter of “the rediscovery of the I in the Thou.” It follows from this elegant idea, to my mind anyway, that in the discovery of the Thou, we find a mirror in which our own souls are made visible.
Here are some additional thoughts that come forward as I think about the goal of finding out the secrets of human nature from the study of madness. I introduce them by describing the adventures of a young man I knew many years ago. He came to me just before a long psychiatric hospitalization. He said he had discovered the secret, not of human nature but of the universe as a whole: the key to all of creation. I asked him to tell me about this amazing secret. He said it was revealed to him in a vision in which he saw the interrelatedness of all things. The vision encompassed the whole of the cosmos in a single image, abolishing all separateness and isolation in an overpowering, radiant unity. He had discovered the heart and soul of existence itself, and repeatedly shouted the secret out: “ALL IS ONE, ALL IS ONE, ALL IS ONE!”
I was curious about the personal context of this unifying vision. His life story was a sad one, involving a world in which the center failed to hold. He had been a golden child, a precocious genius who from an early age had shown stunning abilities in both science and the arts. His parents considered him to be a gift from God, filling their otherwise rather empty lives with a transcendent meaning. Complying with their expectations, the boy grew up with A-plus achievements in every endeavor, and the parents believed they had brought a great man into the world. The breakdown occurred on the eve of his graduation from college, a summa cum laude on the threshold of glorious success in life. One little problem tripped him up: a girlfriend he had become very attached to decided to end their relationship. His love for her, such as it was, expressed a part of him that contained, tenuously, his personal truth. Being a stellar achiever had always come easy and fit perfectly into his parents’ needs. Losing the girlfriend was different; it was a disaster beyond imagining for a boy who had so little he could call truly his own. It was the end of a life that had scarcely begun. Unspeakable agonies followed the loss, a suffering beyond all comprehension in which everything that had seemed together was now torn asunder.
This was when the vision of cosmic oneness supervened. Every atom and subatomic particle, and every galaxy supercluster came together before him, in a vast network of interdependent relations. It was a breathtakingly beautiful tapestry encompassing the totality of all existing things. People in this young man’s social world—family, friends, college teachers—thought he had gone crazy and the decision was made to hospitalize him. What he was doing, however, was putting the world back together again, reconnecting all that had fallen apart.
I came to the idea that his vision was utterly, profoundly a true one. He had indeed encountered a secret of the universe, one that has been thoroughly hidden from us in this age of atomism. We think of our own lives as a matter of isolated minds existing alongside each other, little separate unit-selves dropped into the world out of their mothers’ wombs. We imagine our minds as having interiors, filled with all manner of mental contents (thoughts, desires, memories, etc.), but subsisting somehow separately from a surrounding external environment. The estrangement between internal and external is paralleled by a dualism between our bodies and our minds. The universe itself, in turn, we visualize as a vast space populated by all things great and small, some of them causally interacting with one another but each of them having its own separate and solitary existence. We are hypnotized by this alienating and fragmenting atomism, regarding it as just the way things are rather than as the ontology that it is. My young man, propelled by a catastrophic experience of the disintegration of the world, broke through the trance of this philosophy to a sudden recognition of the unity of all beings. I found his thinking to be powerful, although at the time I met him he was unable to do much with it other than to cry and shout.
Working with those who dwell in the extreme range of psychological disorder presents us with dramatic signs of how our very selfhood and sense of the reality of the world are embedded in contexts shared with other human beings. One sees, for example, how the “symptoms” of so-called mental illness do not emanate from a wholly internal condition afflicting the isolated individual but instead vary as a function of the response that person encounters from others. When responses felt as objectification and invalidation are supplanted by experiences of being understood and included in the community of others, striking shifts occur in delusions and hallucinations, and chronic annihilation states recede. C.G. Jung, the great psychiatrist, acknowledged this in his famous words: Schizophrenics cease to be schizophrenic at the moment they feel understood (Laing, 1959, p. 165). We, as clinicians, are therefore involved in the psychological disturbances we are called upon to treat, and the wounds requiring healing in our patients are matched by the wounds we carry in our own hearts.
But there is more. The universe exists in such a way as to generate the possibility of our own coming into being, and a profound argument can be made that it is as it is in part because we are here to be aware of it. Human beings are implicated in the way in which the world becomes manifest, and at the same time the study of the cosmos is the universe becoming conscious of itself. The observer and the observed, in both the natural sciences and the human sciences, are inseparable from each other, and the constituents of reality, on smaller and smaller scales, turn out to be interdependent, entangled phenomena rather than fully separable units somehow subsisting in ontological solitude.
In other words, my young man was absolutely right. One might wonder what happened to him. It is sad. He was diagnosed on the basis of the grandiose euphoria he showed: manic-depressive illness was the Dx. The treatment provided to him included multiple hospitalizations, extensive electroconvulsive therapy, and an ever-varying succession of antipsychotic drugs. The last time I saw him, fifteen years into this so-called treatment, he was doing poorly—depressed, confused, unable to work, obese, and … no girlfriend. I wonder what the outcome might have been if someone instead had been able to sit down with him—for a day, or a year, or a decade—and discuss what it meant that all is one. Is it not possible that good things might have emerged from such conversations?
A final thought regarding the story I have been telling: How is it that this young man, in captivity to his parents but also in a struggle to render a shattered universe whole, was a mirror in which I could find a reflection of myself? When I was a young college student, I made a discovery of my own that was very similar. In the context of an exposure to Zen Buddhism, it came to me that all dualism is false: Every one of the great contrasts in our culture’s history and philosophy—internal/external, matter/spirit, masculine/feminine, good/evil, freedom/determinism, I/You—were illusory, and our belief in them was a trance from which we needed to awaken. Looking back, I see the philosophy of monistic adualism I then adopted as importantly related to the shattering trauma of my mother’s death. I also see it as a precursor to the unifying theories and philosophical ideas in which I have come to believe.


