http://www.tandfonline.com/doi/full/10.1080/00107530.2014.905903

Psychoanalytic Dialogues (2014)
The Object Invades: Illustration and Implications
Stephen Seligman

Introduction

In our work as psychoanalysts, all of us encounter cases that prove to be especially challenging. One category of such cases involves patients who reveal, over time, far more serious disturbance than they first presented. Accounts of such treatments are often stirring reports of patients’ progress and analysts’ heroic efforts (Cooper, 2011). But I suspect it is more common for analysts confronting such cases to struggle with persistent hardship and uncertain outcomes. This is such an account.
To set out my purpose in writing this account, I first need to convey key features of my case. My patient, Sharon, was raised by a mother who was likely psychotic, a condition that shaped and traumatized Sharon. Sharon is the only one of her mother's children to maintain communication with the mother, in a bond, both estranged and central, that compelled my attention. A distinct feature of Sharon's character is a disjunction between her surface functionality and underlying organization. Her extremely primitive states were slow to appear, but once they did, they were powerful. Crude forms of experience emerged: raw sensation, which was eerie at times, and body occurrences ranging from somatic symptoms to dramatic body-based events. Although such unmentalized experience (Mitrani, 1995) was not unfamiliar to me, the primitiveness of Sharon's states and their strange, disturbing quality was confounding.
For much of Sharon's treatment, over 12 years, I met with limited success. I felt, continuously, as if I was struggling with the most basic task, that is, trying to understand who my patient was—trying to fathom her inner workings and archaic bonds. Throughout, Sharon's distress was great; often, the treatment stalled. Many times I turned to the literature for ideas, searching several domains (including attachment and trauma theories, to cite just two examples), before choosing early object relations as most relevant to my case. In fact, I turned to the literature not only to feel guided in helping Sharon, but also to feel held myself.
One idea, which I found only recently, best captured my patient's disturbed dynamics in detail. The idea comes from the work of Paul Williams, a British independent analyst, who has extensive experience with psychotic and disturbed patients. Because Williams's idea is central to this article, I will provide an overview of it here.
Williams (2010a) writes that in some narcissistic individuals, violent disturbance to self-development is caused by early “incorporation of an invasive object” (p. 3). That object is then experienced as part of the self and, paradoxically, as an alien presence from which the self needs urgent shelter. The phenomenon is so primitive as to transpire in the physical domain, Williams writes, and not in fantasy like other forms of internalization. Williams believes such a primitive introject comes from a caregiver who did not regard or mentalize her infant as separate, but instead predatorily co-opted her child for her own projections. At once invaded and allied, the preyed-on child/self is beset by divisiveness, which causes confusion and obstructs the child's own secondary process thought.
In this article, my main purpose is to illustrate Williams's formulation as well as the value of his idea through an extended look at my case. Of course, other analysts, in the object relations tradition, have described primitive, fusional states stemming from disturbed bonds (e.g., Grotstein, 1980; Rosenfeld, 1983; Bick, 1986/2002; Tustin, 1986; Gaddini, 1992; Mitrani, 2001; Farhi, 2010). But I think Williams's view is important for his description of a set of such states with these particular features: a violent, terrorizing object; an outcome of severe fragmentation, with one part of the child/self seemingly grafted onto the object, and another, recoiling from it; and complex sequelae affecting identity, intellectual function, body awareness, and other areas of structuralization.
A similar idea is the alien self, viewed by Fonagy, Gergely, Jurist, and Target (2002) as a construction that arises when a child internalizes aspects of a misattuned parent's mind. But Fonagy et al.'s alien self is a normal occurrence, causing disjunction due to ordinary lapses in parental mentalization; it only becomes pathogenic under certain circumstances. Williams's invasive object is always pathogenic, splitting personality into distinct, warring suborganizations. He stresses the role of force, ground into the child while it simultaneously fractures other systems. It is important to note that Williams's object seems to enter the child unmediated by other psychic agency; it is like a “foreign body” that is implanted (p. 4).
My illustration of Williams's formulation hinges on hindsight: I will recount the affects, states, and transference–countertransference that bewildered me at the time, and that now, looking back, suggest the phenomenon I recently discovered.
Let me proceed to a secondary intention by stating that I wish Williams had taken his idea further. That is, although he clearly describes the psychopathology that results from an invasive object, he does not provide a map of the clinical work needed to remove or replace it. Because the analytic relationship is central in engendering inner change, how do we proceed when internalization processes have been so decimated?
I will raise such questions concerning clinical course without being able to provide definitive answers. I will, however, relate recently emerging responses in my patient that may be the result of certain therapeutic processes and that offer a possible basis for reorganization in patients with this syndrome. In this way, I hope to contribute to more fully elaborating the clinical relevance of Williams's idea.

Clinical Beginnings and History

Sharon initially sought help for acute anxiety after she had ended a relationship. In her 30s and attractive, she conveyed an impression of intactness that was upended by the breakup. She had a practical bent, with hints of a larger intelligence in her speech. Her manner struck me as somewhat formal. However, Sharon was unfamiliar with psychotherapy, and I was sympathetic to her efforts to find help.
Sharon was a transplanted Midwesterner who loved New York and its cosmopolitan air. Her courtship was quickened by the romantic backdrop of nighttime city scenes. The man she was involved with was an engineer in the armed services, and Sharon eventually moved with him to a suburb with other service families. Over time, however, she came to feel as if she had “taken on” the life of a “blue-collar Army wife,” and grew unhappy. But when she initiated a breakup she was overtaken by panic, which caused her misgivings about her decision. After all, Sharon explained, this man had occasioned her only experience of the feeling of love in her life.
It was not long before the bizarre horrors of Sharon's early life emerged. She was one of four daughters, two older and one younger than she. Her parents separated when Sharon was six, and when her father left, her mother had a “nervous breakdown,” in Sharon's words. Her mother threw her father's belongings in the car, drove to the river, got out, and backed the car into the current. The next time Sharon saw her mother, she was “ranting in a hospital cafeteria.” From then on, Sharon says, “I always knew my mother was crazy.”
Once she returned home, her mother was never fully functional. She often stayed in her room, chain smoking, emerging only to cook meals. She never attended school functions; holidays came and went unmarked. Throughout, her mother's menacing presence, as the “wicked witch” in Sharon's words, pervaded their home.
Was there ever a normal mother whom Sharon could recall? Even before her mother's decompensation, Sharon believes her mother was fragile, if placidly benign. Her mother (i.e., Sharon's grandmother) had died young, and Sharon's mother, left with an overtaxed father, was an only child. At least Sharon had her sisters—although, Sharon says, she does not know if she loves her sisters, only that they raised themselves in a no-nonsense program of survival.
Although it appeared, then, that love was not a motive force, hatred was. Sharon's mother mobilized through rage, first aimed at her husband, then, it was disturbing to learn, at her children. Sharon's mother would sit the girls down, then viciously berate them for conspiring in her downfall. Sharon was hit by her mother once and remained terrified of her thereafter. Flanked by her sisters who argued and fought back, Sharon remained silent during her mother's tirades, suggesting a traumatized state (Ogden, Minton, & Pain, 2006).
How it was that the children were left in their mother's care is unclear. (Sharon also does not know her mother's diagnosis at the time of hospitalization.) As Sharon recalls, during her parents’ divorce proceedings, her oldest sister gave instructions to say that they wanted to live with mother, for mother's sake. And there they went. Visitation to father occurred until he remarried; Sharon saw him rarely after.
Eventually, Sharon's sisters married, moved, and broke off communication with mother. Sharon, too, moved away—but she alone remained in contact. Through the course of our work, Sharon would come to ponder her place as the child seemingly left the job of maintaining contact with mother, whereas her sisters broke free. Was she, in her place between more-embattled sisters, expected to “balance” their rebellion? Did Sharon's own temperament (quiet) make her vulnerable to her mother, who would prey on her? Why me? Sharon would wonder. Although she was uncertain how it had happened, one aspect of Sharon's family dynamic was clear. Across miles, across months of silence between them, across moments like the one when she got back the Mother's Day card she’d sent torn in pieces—Sharon stayed in contact.
Long before Sharon posed her question, and in an early session, she related a preliminary history, including some grim experiences of her mother. Then, she added these words: “Oh—I forgot something important. I have no relationship with her.” She said this matter-of-factly, but her words perplexed me. Mother was everywhere in her history, and nowhere to be found, according to her. Were her words disavowing of a bond too abusive to own? Sharon's words would resound in my mind, like an internal lyric to my efforts to understand her difficulties in relation to her maternal object. I could not foresee how her words would gain other relevance for me.

Early Stage: Fragmentation and Anxiety

Sharon's formal quality continued as our work began, as if she approached sessions like official meetings. I did not yet grasp the wariness underlying her manner. Her speech could be deliberate, its spareness making certain turns of phrase especially expressive.
“Toughie me,” Sharon quietly said, naming the set of gritty skills that she’d relied on to leave her small town for the city and now move from her shared home with her boyfriend. She still had episodes of panic, so I referred her for medication. The psychiatrist saw only adjustment disorder. But as Sharon's acute anxiety persisted, I grew concerned. “Toughie me,” it seemed to me, was only a crusty cover; her emerging dysfunction suggested that Sharon actually bore the effects of gross failures in holding and containment.
When I asked her to tell me more about her early life, Sharon's reply was lean but descriptive: “It's all the same feeling—fear, foreboding, and misery.” She acquired certain habits that she compulsively turned to as a child. Until age 11, she clung to a “blanky,” and sucked her thumb so vigorously her finger bled. She took to silently reciting the alphabet in reverse. Sharon's strenuous reliance on autosensual relief and repetitive mental games suggested unintegration. Without the formative care of a containing maternal object, children try to fasten themselves together through any stimuli available, including their own minds’ maneuvers (Bick, 1968, 1986/2002; Corrigan & Gordon, 1995).
I wondered whether Sharon's boyfriend had supplied her with binding, the loss of which had caused her panic. Indeed, Sharon sometimes came in at the start of a week and recounted, unemotionally, a weekend spent in retreat and passive stimulation. She would spend two days enveloped by her couch, watching television—feeling “glued” to it, she said—unable to rouse herself even late at night to turn off the television or lights, to resettle herself to go to bed. I found myself growing anxious, listening to her accounts of such weekends spent at sea, absent basic regulatory cycles or temporal bearings. I think I sensed my patient's fear of falling to pieces, underlying these episodes (Bick, 1986/2002).
I quickly sought to install psychotherapy, twice a week, as a grounding framework. I tried to bolster cohesion through mentalization of Sharon's competencies, underlying her record of self-supporting employment. This response seemed strengthening, at first: Sharon moved up as an administrator for a manufacturer. But I soon questioned this as a true “advance.” Did her new weekly tasks and meetings amount to another form of routinization—sought autosensually in her childhood, now reproduced at a higher level of organization? Were Sharon's gains only of external structures without inner growth?
Tearful cracks in her speech still heralded her keen anxiety, which was caused not only by her inner fragmentation but also by certain stressors. During one work evaluation, although her performance was viewed well, her request for a promotion was declined. Her manager said that there were others ahead of her, and expressed his “dismay” over her job dissatisfaction. The manager's “dismay” left Sharon distraught. His use of this term seemed to turn him into an authoritarian object, which cued her traumatic sense of danger.
Sharon's mother was also in her life at this time, through telephone calls that Sharon had reinstated since her mother had grown old. Sharon dreaded these calls because her mother “talked at” her about her own needs and lapsed into old grievances. One weekend, on such a call, Sharon listened as her mother began by talking fairly normally. But then, her mother turned and started to rail. Sharon proceeded on her errands, and, over the next few hours, made her way through the neighborhood and then through the city to an auto agency to rent a car—all the while remaining on this call, still carrying her mother's voice, on her cell, close at hand.
Sharon seemed a mindless depot for her mother's outpourings! Troubling, too, was my sense that the mother's voice—extended over time and place that day—had served some basic, orienting function. I was fascinated to come across an observation made by Meltzer (1975) of people in primitive states of fragmentation: Meltzer said that the form of contact such patients seemed to seek “was only a sort of tropism relationship, with direction, as it were” (p. 301; emphasis added).
Was treatment itself only filling this function for Sharon? Was I a kind of signaling device? I certainly felt part of an external apparatus—“therapy”—where the patterned scheduling gave form to Sharon's weekly life. But I was not at all a person to her. Her attitude toward me was polite, but impersonal; I was kept at a remove.

