http://www.tandfonline.com/doi/full/10.1080/1551806X.2015.979467

Psychoanalytic Perspectives (2015)
Exploring Dissociation and Dissociative Identity Disorder: A Roundtable Discussion
Sheldon Itzkowitz, Richard A. Chefetz, Margaret Hainer, Karen Hopenwasser, and Elizabeth F. Howell 

Prologue

The seeds of this roundtable were planted decades ago when I began working with a woman who was diagnosed with what was then called Multiple Personality Disorder (MPD). The tragic story of her life could fill the pages of this volume, and then some. Of the many aspects of her life that moved me, the treatment she received by therapist after therapist, hospital after hospital, was both tragic and shocking. For the extremely dissociated and DID patient, providing a coherent narrative of one’s life is no easy or simple task. And it’s understandable why well-intentioned mental health professionals, uninformed about the powerful impact of trauma-induced dissociation on the organization of consciousness, are beset with confusion and insecurity. Clinicians often find themselves at a loss about how to understand, diagnose, and treat someone who might be switching right before their eyes between different levels of consciousness and multiple self-states—that may reflect different ages, levels of cognitive sophistication, and even gender. But the repeated accusations of lying and manipulation, of not believing in the story this woman was able to tell, were unforgivable. Many an ER doctor had their turn suturing her bleeding, self-inflicted wounds, the cleanly divaricated skin made by the finely honed edges of razors and box cutters. Just a glance at these scars of self-hate carved into various parts of her body should have been enough to persuade anyone of the seriousness and severity of this woman’s life circumstance.
At the time I began working with this woman, I had an appointment as a supervising psychologist at a Manhattan medical center. I quickly realized I needed help, so I began discussing this case with several of my colleagues at work, only to find that none of them had ever had experience treating a person with MPD/DID. In fact, some of them were taught that the diagnosis was fraudulent. I also came to learn that they, as well as several of my former supervisors and professors from my years of psychoanalytic training, held a jaundiced view of the very idea of MPD/DID. These views were based more on theoretical grounds rather than any real experience. Ultimately, I was confronted with their scorn and criticism of the diagnosis, my patient, and my work. I began feeling isolated, dismissed, and lost, unsure of where to turn for help in understanding how to be helpful to my patient—a parallel process, indeed.
Mindful of the gap in psychoanalytic thinking, I was very fortunate to find a supervisor experienced in treating dissociative and DID patients from an interpersonal-relational psychoanalytic perspective; her help was invaluable. Eventually I met more like-minded colleagues, and I continued working with two supervisors who have been at the forefront of writing about dissociation, multiplicity, and the dissociative mind. It was these experiences that motivated me to advocate to the editors of Psychoanalytic Perspectives for a roundtable discussion on dissociation and DID to appear in this journal; I am indebted to them for their encouragement and support. I am equally indebted to my fellow panelists, and friends: Rich Chefetz, Marg Hainer, Karen Hopenwasser, and Elizabeth Howell, for agreeing to be a part of “Exploring Dissociation and Dissociative Identity Disorder: A Roundtable Discussion.”

Part 1: What Is Trauma?

Margaret Hainer (MH): So, we’re delighted to be talking about this issue close to our hearts, dissociation in general and DID in particular. All of us have been working with patients with DID for over twenty years and, we owe them special thanks and acknowledgment. To paraphrase Guntrip (1971), the British object-relations analyst: Today’s theory is what we learned from our patients yesterday.
With that thought in mind, I was thinking that a good place to start would be with a definition that you made in your first book, Elizabeth: Trauma is an event that causes dissociation (Howell, 2005). I wondered if you could tell us a little bit about why you made the formulation in that way, what you were trying to address with that, and then we can hear from other people about their feelings on the same topic.
Elizabeth Howell (EH): The reason that I came up with this formulation is that there are so many different views of trauma, so many differing assumptions. It gets very confusing, and then nobody really knows for sure what it means. The difficulty of the question is a real problem for the field of mental health, in which “trauma studies” have now proliferated, and in which the word “trauma” is so much a part of our discourse and is so essential to developing theories of how the mind works.
So one area in which we have entered murky waters has been with the attempts to define trauma as only “objective” or massive trauma, such as a devastating earthquake or events in which one had one’s life threatened or witnessed that in another. DSM-IV and DSM-IV-R have tried to define trauma in such “objective” ways that are assumed to pertain to the overwhelming nature of the event. A notable problem with this “objective” view of trauma is the issue of resilience. Some people are very resilient to the kinds of events that many would be extremely harmed by, and others may suffer terribly under what would appear to be minor stress. This led to a subjective definition of trauma. The problem with this subjective view is that anything that a person finds unpleasant could be defined as traumatic. This overinclusiveness then can drain the word of any meaningful specificity.
In my book I defined trauma as “that which causes dissociation,” as a way to transcend the problem of objective and subjective. My reasoning was related to going with a general understanding that psychic trauma is something that is overwhelming to the mind, something that is so terrible or so shocking that it cannot be assimilated by the mental frameworks, that it has torn the fabric of understanding. The mind dissociates, it develops fissures and/or blank spaces within itself to accommodate the trauma. This description of trauma as “that which causes dissociation,” seemed to work as an answer to “What is trauma?” with respect to the objective versus the subjective points of view, or the designations of “big” or “little” trauma.
MH: Thank you. Other people have thoughts on this?
Richard Chefetz (RC): I think that Elizabeth’s statement opens a lot of questions, like: What really is a trauma? To what extent is a trauma something that happens around us versus something that happens inside us? And what’s the link between the two?
How do we understand the drive-by schoolyard shootings? The data from that suggest that there are some people who developed robust PTSD and weren’t even in school the day of the shooting. So what the heck is that? There is something about the meaning of things, and the very personal experience of a trauma, that’s different from one person to the next. When I lecture, I usually try to talk with the audience before my presentation to see who’s there and who I’m going to be speaking with. I always ask if there are people from the VA hospitals, and I have one question I always ask, and that is: “Is it true that your toughest cases of recalcitrant PTSD are in veterans with childhood trauma histories?” And the answer is always yes, so what is that about? So rather than elaborating on that, I just want to let those questions sit on the table, because I think they’re really, really important. I’m not sure we have all the answers, but I’d be curious if somebody has some thoughts about that.
Karen Hopenwasser (KH): Well, this is earlier in our discussion than I thought that this topic would come up. We need to talk about intergenerational transmission of trauma, which speaks to not even needing to be in the room or near the traumatic event. The question is: How does this information transfer—not just in a narrative form, but in nonverbal or somatic transfer of information? There’s work going on in the field of epigenetics that has to do with generational transmission of vulnerabilities. I have also seen dissociation that is not trauma based, because other things can cause dissociation. So perhaps we can discuss further the different feel and texture of dissociation that’s caused by traumatic events as opposed to other sources, some of which are understandable and some of which are mysterious.
Shelly Itzkowitz (SI): If we talk about “big T” for big trauma versus “little t” for little trauma, then I think we have to think in terms of “big D” for big dissociation and “little d” for little dissociation. Just in terms of resiliency, when we think of trauma causing dissociation, we have to keep in mind the age of onset of the particular kind of trauma. Trauma happening to a 3-, 4-, or 5-year-old, for example, happens within a still developing cognitive structure. A child’s understanding and appreciation of events and ability to cope with trauma is very different from that of an adult. I think that’s something important for us to keep in mind.
MH: But even the question of resilience is complicated, right? I think that many people with DID are quite resilient in certain ways or in certain parts of themselves, and I guess for all of us, there are times that we pull through pretty well, and there are other times we kind of fall apart. Karen, what were you saying at the end of your remarks about some of those differences?
KH: Well, that brings us to one other issue that I think would be good to clarify at the beginning. We talk about DID as a diagnosis, so I just want to go on record to say that as far as I’m concerned, psychiatric diagnoses are at best 20th century, certainly not a 21st-century way of thinking about symptoms and problems in people’s lives. We do need to clarify what we mean by DID. Some people with DID are more resilient and some people are less, because DID is not one thing. At the very least, if we see DID as a complex adaptation, then resilience is also determined by coexisting personality structures, other comorbidities and other relational influences.
Some people have dissociative symptoms with other diagnoses, and then we get into a debate: Is this person dissociative or is this person not dissociative? I think that’s the wrong discussion, actually, with the exception being that chemical substances can cause dissociation—intoxication or drug use, or medication can cause dissociation. Metabolic disorders can cause dissociation. So there are times when we see a person who may have a history of trauma, but the dissociation may be something medical going on, so that all needs to get sorted out. But that is clearly different than what I assume we’re going to clarify, which is what we mean by Dissociative Identity Disorder.
RC: I still think that this “What’s a trauma” question is unresolved in our discussion in a big way, and I want to make it more complicated and more difficult for us by saying this: I think we’re all aware of Martin Teicher’s studies and his 2010 paper entitled “Hurtful Words: Association of Exposure of Peer Verbal Abuse with Elevated Psychiatric Symptom Scores and Corpus Callosum Abnormalities” (Teicher, Samson, Sheu, Polcari, & McGreenery, 2010) with his fMRI study of the brains of kids between about 3 and 16. He shows unequivocally that these kids have altered developmental structural signs as a result of ridicule and bullying. The hippocampus doesn’t develop properly, the connections between the left and right hemisphere via the corpus callosum don’t develop properly, and the executive function of precuneus doesn’t develop properly. Now there are a bunch of people doing research and piggybacking on his results.
So we’re talking about very profound neural changes from hurtful words, so I think there’s a red herring in our literature with regards to “What’s a trauma?” I think we all go “ooh, ahh” when we hear something horrible, and I’m not trying to say it’s not horrible, but I think we underestimate the power of tapping on a nail a hundred thousand times versus hitting it once with a sledgehammer. If you tap on it a hundred thousand times, it’s going into the wood. It takes longer, but it drives just as deep. When you have to deal with the consciousness for a hundred thousand taps that are relentless, there’s a whole different process involving a kind of personal torture that goes on. So those kinds of traumatic experiences are extraordinary in their impact, but they don’t have the gravity of an explosion. In Psychiatric Clinics of North America (2006), the volume that I know you were just looking at [referring to Shelly Itzkowitz], there’s an article by Lyons-Ruth (”From Infant Attachment Disorganization to Adult Dissociation: Relational Adaptations or Traumatic Experiences?”; Lyons-Ruth, Dutra, Schuder, & Bianchi, 2006), and she talks about the best predictor of adult dissociation being what I’ll say is emotional unresponsiveness.
Now, there’s an argument about what you need to create a dissociative disorder. How much trauma? How much emotional unresponsiveness? But I think we ought to ask the question differently, and that is: What produced the vulnerability that evokes or provokes the dissociative response? Take someone who’s traumatized, take a 16-year-old who’s date raped and comes home with their clothing ripped and their hair undone, and they walk through the door of the house and Mom meets them and slaps them in the face and says, “You slut!” What’s the trauma? I mean, the rape is enough of a trauma, but I would wager that it gets cemented in place by the mother’s response, as opposed to “Oh my god! What happened to you, my baby! Who did that to you? Where’s your father? Oh my god!” It’s a whole different kind of experience. So what’s a trauma?
EH: In the latter case, it isn’t necessarily traumatizing, because the person can then connect the terror of what happened with something safe, with a safe attachment, and there is a likely possibility that the mind-splitting terror and decimation of the psyche can be repaired and healed. Your analogy about the nail is a beautiful one; a nail being hit a hundred thousand times, especially if we’re talking about the texture of shame, of unremitting shame, is too much to take in. The person can’t really take it in without developing a self-state that keeps the terror or the shame separated so that the person can continue to function. Not being able to process these terrible things weakens the person’s ability to absorb information as part of who one is and what one expects.
KH: Just to reiterate or clarify that you’re talking about this happening in childhood.
EH: Yes.
KH: That these repetitive taps or experiences of neglect while the brain is developing is really what is key.
SI: This addresses the issues and is also a theme of a Lyons-Ruth’s (2002) article, and one by Liotti (1999) too, on attachment—the nature of attachment, and whether or not the mother–infant bond is one that allows the infant to survive and tolerate what would create a not-me experience. Emotional difficulties in a parent, one who is disorganized herself, along with infant-child maltreatment and failures in mentalization contribute to a disorganized attachment bond in the infant. The infant and young child become vulnerable to hyperarousal because two competing emotional states emerge simultaneously—the need for attachment and the fear of the traumatizing parent. The infant and young child can’t deal with emotional overstimulation because there isn’t a protective barrier, like having a parent who would say, “Oh my dear, my baby what happened?” and this makes the infant much more vulnerable and less resilient.
MH: Also, I was thinking of Winnicott’s (1960) formulation about “going-on-being,” the infant that has the experience of being contained in a holding environment that feels safe enough, so that the infant can have the experience of what he calls “going-on-being.” It can be interrupted—not just with neglect, not just with abuse, but also with intrusion, with too much stimulation, or nonattunement. This can disrupt a developing sense of self.
But I wonder: I’m interested in pursuing more about what is a trauma, or how we define that. I don’t have any difficulty with what you said, Rich, but I think that sometimes, some of these things feel semantic to me in the sense that I think of it as how one responds to trauma as both the trauma and the aftermath. The aftermath is the environment, is what kind of recovery is offered, or not—whether it’s chronic, or whether a one-incident—how the world can become safe again. All of those things determine what the trauma is, but I think if someone’s been raped that there is some trauma even if there is a great response afterward.
KH: Oh, of course.
MH: Right.
KH: But I think what Rich is talking about is the development of an organization around it, so we maybe need to define trauma with the concept of organization. Bruce Perry (2006, 2009; Perry & Hambrick, 2008) has written extensively about the developing brain of children who were traumatized, and really gives you a feeling for how, whether you’re looking at it neurobiologically, neurophysiologically, neuropsychologically, or intrapsychically, there is a complex system of organization around traumatic experience over time.
SI: It also underscores what you’re both saying about how the trauma affects the body; it’s not just the mind. That it actually changes physical structures in the brain.
EH: I’d just like to add to what everyone is focusing on, this issue about trauma and attachment and following up on things that Karen and Shelly and Rich have said. Liotti has done a lot of work on showing that disorganized attachment underlies later dissociative disorders, but when you look at that disorganized attachment, you are really talking about response to trauma. We’re talking about a child who can’t take in that the parents may be very different at different times—a rageful or a frightening parent (who may also be frightening because of being frightened) and a parent who can be approached as a haven of safety. So the child both wants to approach and to run away. The fear system and the attachment system don’t cohere, and different models of attachment develop. The child is really forming different organizations of self/other. And that’s certainly dissociative; and we call it attachment disorders or disorganized attachment, but really it starts out, to my mind, as trauma.
KH: Well, the other thing to add is the recognition that at one’s physiological start there are differences in regulation of boundaries and stimuli that are not initially trauma based. That also is why you see such differences between individuals having the same experience and responding differently to it.
RC: I want to respond to two things that are on the table. I’ll start with the attachment piece, and I’ll just read what I wrote on the pad as I was thinking through what’s been said: Dissociation is a paradoxically resilient response to the disconfirmation and invalidation of insecure attachment situations that allows the child to maintain proximity to the parent.
EH: I’m glad you wrote that down!
KH: Yeah.
MH: Really good!
RC: I think that we are always trying to make dissociation go away, make it conscious, and replace it with something more efficient and more useful. But frankly, if you’re treating somebody who is still being abused and you try taking their dissociation away, you’re really going to be clinically in a lot of trouble because you’re taking away what they need.
The other thing, Marg, that I’m still thinking about is the problem of trauma as it’s couched as “big T” versus “little t,” dissociation, and the notion of semantics. Because there’s a way in which I agree with you, and then there’s a way in which I disagree with you. I’ll leave the agreement part alone, but the disagreement comes from thinking about Putnam’s early paper in 1986 on “The Clinical Phenomenology of Multiple Personality Disorder: Review of 100 Recent Cases” (Putnam, Guroff, Silberman, Barban, & Post, 1986). I think the numbers are pretty close to 85% of dissociators had a history of sexual abuse. If you added physical abuse, then the abuse score went up to something like 95%. But there was always the 5% in Frank’s study that he couldn’t explain as to why they had no abuse history. And that was in 1986. I think we’re better at this discernment of dissociative process and dissociative disorderliness than we used to be, so we’re seeing that 5%—my opinion, no study—we’re seeing that 5% grow. Because in my practice, it’s in the 20% range. It’s in the subtlety of the histories. All these folks start with the statement, “Oh, I had a normal childhood,” and it turns out to be not so normal.
MH: Or they can’t remember half of it.
RC: But that’s the script. That’s the family mythology, and they carry that into the treatment. So I think that if we insist on defining trauma as in “big T,” then we get in trouble in the mind-set that we have, the way we sit and listen. Because we’re listening for big stuff when it’s the little stuff that nails people again and again and again, and we could overlook that. I also think that the focus on trauma back in the ’80s led to a lot of trouble in our field in assuming trauma and hunting for it, as opposed to naturalistically letting the narrative of somebody’s life unfold.
MH: I agree with what you are saying. I, too, don’t find the “big T, little t” formulation helpful, but what I was trying to talk about is a way of thinking about trauma within the context of a life. For example, a client whose mother was a Holocaust survivor and had gotten pregnant right out of a relocation camp was not prepared to be a mother. She was not enough recovered and was not a great mother to the child who came many years later. Her father was also a survivor, more intact, however he wasn’t home much. It isn’t that I think, well, the Holocaust did not literally happen to her, it’s not her trauma; because in a way it did happen to her. So that’s why I don’t find “big T, little t” very helpful.
RC: I’m glad you don’t.
MH: Yeah. But the transfer of that experience did happen to her.
KH: On that subject, there are two things that I wanted to add—one is cultural and one is physiological. One of my thoughts about the controversies that we experienced as clinicians treating people who were mistreated as children is that in some ways the word trauma distances us from what has actually happened, muting or softening the awareness of violence. To recognize dissociative processing in adult life is to recognize the level of violence in children’s lives. There is a tremendous resistance in our society to acknowledging the level of violence within the family and within communities.
The other is that dissociation can be looked at in a number of different ways depending on what your model of the mind is. I was trained in a model that was pretty linear. That there’s a self, and there’s an ego and id, and a superego. But basically the mind really is a complex information processor. It used to be talked about as parallel pathways of processing. Now we’re not talking so parallel, but basically that a lot of information is processing at the same time in the mind or brain—brain-mind. One of the things about dissociation that’s particularly interesting to me is that it becomes a unique vehicle for understanding this complex processing because of the persistence of these separated parallel pathways, or shifting states of mind.
SI: Just as you were speaking, or just before you spoke, I wrote something down to address the 5% that you were talking about, Rich, the Putnam’s studies and the 20% in your office. I was thinking about Elizabeth’s book on dissociation, thinking about Philip Bromberg (1998, 2006, 2011) and all the work he’s done, and the idea of dissociation as process versus dissociation as structure. When we talk about DID it feels like, maybe that 5% of Putnam’s study had dissociative phenomena and dissociate, but when the nail gets hit a hundred thousand times, the child has to find a way to cope, and then that’s when I think the mind develops dissociation as a structure and then splits self-experience. Getting to what you’re saying, Karen, I think you’re talking about the distinction between mind as singular and bounded versus the way we tend to think about mind now as being multiple and discontinuous.
KH: Well, one thing to clarify: I would not say the mind develops dissociation; I would say that the ability of the child’s mind to dissociate does not dissipate. That it’s reinforced, and even enhanced as a result, and we could use other words too. Stress. Extreme stress will affect the development of a child’s brain, which will affect the way in which dissociation is maintained—can be maintained.
MH: So this is the idea of it not starting off as a unitary mind.
KH: Right.
MH: But that the infant starts as much more fragmented than that, but under certain circumstances rigidifies in that fragmentation rather than develops.
KH: I would not use the word fragmentation and I wouldn’t use the word rigidifies, and this is my own personal bias. I think there’s a reason why so many of my dissociative patients are enormously creative and talented. I have files of amazing pictures, paintings and drawings, and poems—this is part of their dissociative experience—that indicate to me that we have, in my opinion, the wrong idea about the mind to begin with. People who have suffered this level of violence or mistreatment in childhood actually show us a more accurate picture of the mind. I don’t entirely see DID as a disorder.
MH: Well, that seems like an important thing to explore. But before we do that …
KH: I may get in trouble for that.
MH: You may get in trouble for that! But before we do that, though, I want to know if there’s agreement among us, because you were sort of moving us from dissociation in general more specifically to DID. So my question is: Do people agree upon the etiology of DID? Is it extreme persistent violence in childhood of one sort or another: physical violence, sexual violence, verbal abuse, or disorganized attachment, which can be or feel violent? Is that what we think creates DID?
EH: I’d like to come back to Rich’s definition of invalidation and disconfirmed insecure attachment. Very important. The issue is much larger than only physical violence.
There is another distinction that needs to be made and that is that dissociation is a much larger concept than trauma, violence, mistreatment, torture. I think that’s an important distinction to make. Dissociation can be a very adaptive ability that does not have to be rigid. The dissociation in hypnosis, in intense absorption in a problem to solve, absorption in a book, and so on, is a larger category than trauma-related dissociation. So dissociation is an important human capacity. Even trauma-related dissociation can be thought of more in terms of its life-saving capacity. Because dissociation, as everyone has been pointing out, can be incredibly life saving and adaptive, and people who fall off mountain cliffs can survive in a cave with their heart rate lowered and their way of perceiving completely different, and it really is protective of survival, and so that, that has some bearing on your question.
MH: The 20%, you mean?
EH: Or the 5%, whether they would have had some kind of interpersonal invalidating experiences that made part of them “not me” that couldn’t be accessed.
RC: I’m glad you asked the question that way, because I think I can pick up your question and go back to something you were saying, Karen. It has to do with model of mind, and what we as clinicians who understand dissociation maybe more than the average bear believe about how a mind forms. What I feel comfortable taking to the bank on that is Putnam’s model, his discrete behavioral state model that he spells out in his 1997 book Dissociation In Children and Adolescents, and is based a lot on Peter Wolff’s (1987) work about states. It’s the notion that it’s normal for infants to develop statehood on little islands that eventually bridge together and then do more than bridging in terms of filling in the land that’s based on parental responsiveness to those states. Whether you invoke Christopher Bollas’s (1989) transformational object paradigm, or you think about the work of Fonagy, Gergely, Jurist, and Target (2003) and I hope I didn’t leave somebody out. …
MH: Well to paraphrase Winnicott (1960): There’s no such thing as a baby, only a baby and its mother.
RC: Right. There needs to be parental responsiveness to the child’s state-ness which validates reality but doesn’t overdo it—doesn’t fall prey to the child’s fantasies of being a superpower—by using what Fonagy calls “markedness,” in order to modulate the child’s fantasies. But I think all these things, multiple self-states are normal as a developmental pattern in all humans and that the difficulty is in families where there isn’t validation, confirmation, and responsiveness—the islands don’t bridge. They don’t knit. It’s a problem, and with regards to Type D infant attachment there are a lot of clinicians who don’t think of these infants as at risk of becoming dissociative adults. In the UK the tendency would be to call them borderline and here in the U.S. we’d more likely call them dissociative—depending on which religion you follow. But I don’t think this is as important as the multiple self-state model itself. We might start there as normative, and I think that may help you not feel so bad, Karen, about saying that you feel that the idea’s sort of normal, that you don’t see it as a disorder. [Laughter] I think I hear you. That it’s not necessarily disorderly to have multiple self-states; it can be a creative solution.
KH: Actually, I’m really glad you brought up Putnam, because that was the beginning for me, reading Putnam’s behavioral states model in 1997. It meshed with my study of nonlinear dynamics and complexity theory and the mind. He may have been the first person who put it together for me (Putnam, 1989). If you look at the early literature on consciousness studies, like the book by Daniel Dennett (1991) called Consciousness Explained, he actually says: What makes us think that having multiple personalities is any more unusual than having one personality? He was speaking not as a clinician but as someone who was putting forth a theory about multiple pathways of processing in the mind, which is one of the ways in which he’s talking about consciousness. So I read that and Putnam around the same time, and I thought, “Oh! This is a whole other way to think about this!”
RC: So I’ll pose you a question.
KH: Okay.
RC: Just to be responsive to your model, which I like, the question is: Okay, I agree, multiple self-states are normal, but what is it about this multiple self-states stuff that creates disorderliness and chaos and pain in somebody’s life?
KH: As you were asking the question, I was thinking about a patient of mine, many, many years ago, a former patient, who called me from the entrance to the Lincoln Tunnel in a 5-year-old voice saying, “I don’t know how to drive this car.” So while shifting, dissociative states of mind may not be a disorder per se, the consequences can lead to dysfunction.
MH: But let’s talk about that concretely for people who are more familiar with theories of the models of the mind and multiplicity and self-states but still don’t have the experience of knowing that they are working with people with DID. If people could talk a bit about what it looks like, and the ways that DID is both a creative response to horrific situations and can be still quite creative in the present, and the liabilities and the disabilities like losing time, for example. And if people could also talk about the varieties of ways that it presents.
KH: Well, just to speak to Rich’s question, and to backpedal on my saying that we shouldn’t talk about rigidity, because in some ways I think that is correct. We all have multiple self-states that are fluid and in communication with each other most of the time. For those with DID, self-states are often not in communication with other self-states—what might be called a lack of co-consciousness. This lack of co-consciousness between self-states can be difficult to discern in clinical work. So that one can work with a patient who does not bring into the session states of mind that they experience outside of the clinical work, and that is part of the reason why it can take a very long time to learn that somebody has states of mind that are not co-conscious. There was a literature review (see Kluft, 1985) that found it took an average of seven years for someone to be in the mental health system before a diagnosis, of what was then called MPD, was made.
MH: But it’s not just a question of consciousness, right? This is speaking to the question of how people vary. I’m thinking of someone who is almost always conscious of other parts of her, and even when she’s sequestered in her internal system, she is able to hear something or be somewhat aware. But she feels separate. She says that in the few moments when she doesn’t have a cacophony of voices in her head, she feels very lonely, because her identity is based on having those different identities. So it gets hard to talk about, because it is not just a question of amnesia, although that is one distinctive variety, where people are not in touch with different parts of themselves at different moments.
RC: I think that a reasonable way to respond to this, Marg, is to talk about diagnosis. It is useful insofar as it holds in one place certain kinds of, if you’ll pardon me, organizing principles for how to think about dissociative disorderliness, and those organizing principles are laid out nice and neatly in the SCID-D (see Steinberg, 1994). So the five main salient criteria are depersonalization, derealization, amnesia (as forgetting outside of the normal range of human experience), identity confusion, and identity alteration. Your patient who feels disconnected, the people who talk about feeling detached, the folks who say nothing has any meaning: “There’s this odd distance I feel with the world”—they have depersonalization/derealization experience. The Kings College London website, from the depersonalization unit, says that 16% of people in the world have had depersonalization experience. That’s a lot. You know, if 20% have major depression …
EH: Twenty years ago I read in the Science Times it was 30%. [Laughter]
RC: But let’s talk for a moment about the subjective experience of dissociative process, and what that does to your marbles when you try to line them up in a row, because it makes a mess. What does a 4-year-old know about depersonalization experience? They’re flying across the room, they’re up on the ceiling, they’re out in the neighborhood. They are certainly not on the floor being hurt. What does someone know about the fog of depersonalization? When you sit with someone and they tell you after 10 years of hard work, “God, you know, there’s this. It’s just so weird sitting here. You look so clear, and I can see the edge of the table. What’s going on? And the colors are, like, bright. What happened?” Well, they had an integrative experience. They tolerated, without noticing, that kind of perceptual disturbance forever and a day, until one day it was gone. So they don’t notice, which is part of what’s so insidious about these processes. There’s no one saying that your actual perceptual experience is sort of off. We have to ask about it, which is a big problem if you don’t understand these things. But I think the subjective experience really tells a lot of the story in terms of depersonalization, the five criteria that move things from normative kind of multiple self-states into the territory of trouble.
KH: Yeah, well, I partly disagree.
RC: What kind of partly? [Laughter]
KH: Right; is it contagious? [Laughter] If you look at depersonalization, for example, it is an experience that in my clinical observation is very, very painful. The patients that I’ve worked with who feel depersonalized are suffering terribly in that experience. Many dissociative patients that I’ve worked with do not complain about depersonalization, and some patients who, in my mind, clearly have dissociative symptoms do not complain about dissociative symptoms. Their presenting complaints are entirely different, and sometimes they have been in treatment for a long time, working on other things, and just to complicate it, for some people, the increased awareness of dissociation as an adaptation or maladaptation becomes a problem in itself. And there is a period, sometimes a prolonged period, in which actually there is more pain. So that’s where I get into trouble with the disorder part of it. Because there are moments in long-term treatments where I feel in some ways that this person was better off before they ever met me, even though hopefully they’ll be better off in the long run.
RC: Would you accept part of the title of the second chapter I’m working on of my book, which has the phrase “The orderly disorder of … ” Because I think that is true, that there is an orderly disorderliness, just like some cardiac rhythms—it’s my family doctor alter here—some cardiac rhythms are regularly irregular.
KH: Right.
RC: And I think that dissociative process works like that, too.
MH: But let’s not go so fast by that question about whether they’re better off before they met you, because they came to you for a reason, right? They came because of pain and distress. They came because things were breaking down and no longer functioning. So it’s not just that the work, the treatment makes the pain greater—which it often does, I agree with you—but it’s also that at some point, the system isn’t functioning so well anymore, and so that brings them into our office in the first place.
KH: And I would say that this is the moment in treatment when it helps to have if not a psychoanalytic training, then to certainly be psychodynamically oriented. Because it’s at that moment when you need to really hang in there and know that growth and healing requires mourning and grief and some suffering, and I am very grateful to have that background. With most of the people I’ve worked with, we’ve passed through those periods, and it takes a long time. But I think for anybody with less experience, I think it can be quite frightening to see the increased pain that comes with some, I don’t use the word integration, but I do use the term co-consciousness.
SI: Increased awareness.
KH: Increased awareness.
EH: I’d like to add to the comments on depersonalization. I’ve often been amazed when people tell me, even though I know, “Oh, I’m always like this. I’m shut off from the feelings.” Even though this is in itself troubling, it did save the person in the past, and perhaps the present, from being overwhelmed by affective arousal. But one of the things that happens here in the separation of these states is that there’s a lack of an ability to place one’s own mental emotional state in a context, in a kind of familiar or reliable context. There is also a lack of an ability to feel that there’s a link, that there’s a possibility to make a transition, that it’s possible to know that there are other self-states, and this doesn’t just apply to DID.
MH: I’m sorry to do this, but we had a request to have break for a few minutes. Oh, you’re okay?
KH: I’m sorry, but I don’t need it.
MH: Does anyone else need it?
EH: I want to stand up.
MH: Okay. Let’s stand up and stretch for a minute.
RC: It’s probably a good time to notice how important self-care is in doing this work.
MH: Oh, that’s a very good point.
KH: Actually, you know what? I’m gonna take a break. [Laughter]
